okay well thank you everyone for coming
along
my name is Roger I know that I'm one of
the cofounders of extinction in belly
we're very honored tonight to have
address from New York and we're going to
be doing a an interview and then opening
opening things up to questions from the
people watching I want to sort of just
go through a few points before we start
first of all the views expressed in this
video don't necessarily reflect the
views of everyone in exile the idea is
for these interviews just this will
provoke debate an open discussion for
myself I've got a few sort of general
questions to ask Chris about obviously
the whole situation and then we'll we'll
take things from there the second thing
I want to do is just acknowledge that
were in the middle of an unprecedented
crisis the corona virus has changed
everything is changing everything by the
day and I think we should all be aware
of what massive suffering is going on
around the world this moment and is
going to get even worse over the coming
weeks and I think we need to look at
what's happening with a very serious
manner I think because this is real and
one of the reasons I feel it's good to
have Chris on is because Chris is being
making really uncompromising statements
about the reality of our situation for a
long time and it seems a good idea to to
have him on tonight to discuss these
these matters I am NOT going to say
master detail what Chris has done or not
doing it suffice to say was as Robin
said journalist with New York Times and
Sphinx listen fourteen books on the
state of the world and I am going to
you open up with a few general questions
and then that's alright requests then I
will invite some questions from the
people watching okay so
my first question is obviously a lot of
people know you Chris in the States and
I expect a lot of people in the UK who
are primarily people watching this video
I guess I've heard of you so much
so I'd like to just start off with it
it's okay so you're just giving a
general background to your your life and
and your progress to this point in time
my father was a Presbyterian minister
also world war ii veteran had been in
north africa i grew up in a in a small
town i lived next to the church my dad
was the major influence on my life he
was very involved in the civil rights
movement this was at a time when in
small rural enclaves such as the one we
lived in Martin Luther King was one of
the most hated men in America indeed
people walked out of his sermons he was
part of a group called concerned clergy
and laity against the war founded by the
radical priests Catholic priest Dan and
Phil Berrigan Phil Berrigan later became
a friend close friend baptized my
youngest daughter opposing the Vietnam
War I was a boy in the 60s but he took
me to these events had a profound
impression on me and finally he was very
outspoken in terms of g/b ltq rights his
brother his youngest brother was gay and
lived with his partner in Greenwich
Village and had been disowned by most of
the families so the only family my uncle
had Jamie was us and my father
translated that pain of being a gay man
in America in the 1950s in the 1960s
into you know the the injustice that the
church in particular visited on G BLT
community the cruelty of the church and
he was eventually pushed out because of
that so he set the template for my own
life I went to Divinity School at
Harvard although I'd written I was a
writer by nature wrote since I was a
child published my first piece when I
was 12 in a historical journal it was
actually the history of my father's
church published a piece in the
Christian Science Monitor while I was
still in college
but I couldn't reconcile the supposed
neutrality and objectivity of journalism
with my father's commitment to social
justice so I moved into an urban ghetto
in Boston Roxbury and ran a small church
as a seminarian across the street from
Mission main mission extension housing
project which was at the time one of the
probably the rocky was without question
the most dangerous and roughest
project in the city and that's where I
an often say I learned to hate liberals
people who talk about empowering people
they never met I would travel from the
ghetto it back to classes in Cambridge
at Harvard and saw through exactly the
the way that kind of rhetoric was used
for self a jewel a ssin would be the
only way to put it
well in fact the actions carried out by
the liberal elites were selfish and
self-centered in a large part and I
dropped out of Divinity School I went to
South America I studied Spanish in
Bolivia with the Maryknoll fathers and
decided that I would be a journalist in
Latin America this was in the early
1980s so you had the dictatorship in
Argentina the military junta that had
disappeared 30,000 of its own citizens
who had Augusto Pinochet in Chile Rios
Montt in Guatemala a murderous regime in
El Salvador where I would end up
spending five years as a reporter and I
felt that it was as close as my
generation was going to come to fighting
fascism and this was of course rooted in
my reverence which continues to this day
for George Orwell so that was how I
stumbled into journalism it was informed
by that kind of social justice of giving
a voice to people who otherwise would
not have a voice it put me in war zones
for pretty much two decades I spent five
years covering the wars in Central
America I spent seven years in the
Middle East I was in Sarajevo during the
war in the former Yugoslavia and then
Kosovo and these were jobs that other
reporters of the New York Times didn't
want as in fact when I went to the
executive editor of the New York Times
joelly veld and told him that I wanted
to go to Sarajevo his response as well I
guess the line starts and ends with you
so people say we'll often look at my
career because
I was 15 years with the New York Times I
was the Middle East bureau chief I was
the Balkan bureau chief for The Times
and I think incorrectly assumed that
somehow there was a change in fact
because I my role at the institution was
to stand as a reporter with those who
were dealing with severe repression I
mean even of course horrific violence
when I got to Sarajevo it was being
shelled there were 2,000 shells a day 45
foreign journalists had already been
killed by the time I got there a
photographer I worked with was wounded
three days after I got there and you
know two dozen people wounded four to
five dead it killed everyday so it was
it was the I imposed myself in those
kinds of situations that's why I spent
so much time in Gaza and I I didn't I
was offered at one point London I didn't
want to go to London I against London I
like England but I had zero interest in
reporting you know on the Royals or God
knows what else you do from a first
world country so I came back to the
United States and did a fellowship at
Harvard in classics mostly reading the
Aeneid and Latin went back to the paper
and that's when my troubles began
because I applied the same kind of
radical critique to the Bush
administration the calls to invade Iraq
which I publicly opposed which angered
the paper now one could speak quite
frankly about slobodan milosevic but and
work for the New York Times but one
could not speak quite frankly about
George W Bush and work for the New York
Times and that's what got me into
trouble I was booed off of a
commencement stage in Rockford Illinois
in 2003 for denouncing the war it's on
YouTube and and then the the right-wing
trash media Fox News Wall Street Journal
wrote an editorial denouncing me and I
was given a formal written reprimand by
the New York Times and told I was no
longer allowed to speak about the war
but and I remember it wasn't the easy
decision I'm not gonna pretend it was my
palms were sweaty I lost my job
not just my job my pension I knew I was
cooked I you know if I continued to
speak out
I would not be hired by any journalistic
enterprise in the United States and but
I also knew as I sat in that office that
in order for me to muzzle myself which
is what they were asking me to do you
know was a you know it was kind of to
pay fealty to my career but to do that
would be to betray my father and I
remember walking out of the building on
229 West 43rd Street in New York and I
think articulating for the first time
that what my father had given me who
himself had been pushed out of the
institutional church where he had worked
for 40 years was freedom I didn't need
the New York I didn't need the imprint
tour of the New York Times to tell me
who I was I don't have a doctorate so I
have a master's degree I started looking
for a job to teach high school English
and coach track I used to be a track
runner in college in high school and I
had written a book called war as a force
that gives us meaning which I didn't
expect anyone to buy it was kind of an
examination of the culture of war after
20 years of covering war and it just
became this massive bestseller sold
hundreds of thousands of copies and that
allowed me to sustain myself as a writer
which I have done ever since and as
Roger pointed out I am you know I
examine culture I wrote a book on the
Christian Right called American fascist
the Christian Right in the war on
America I wrote on the collapse of
liberalism book called death of the
liberal class I wrote on you know our
post literate spectacle society it's
called Empire of illusion the end of
literacy and the triumph of spectacle I
wrote a book with a great cartoonist Joe
Sacco called days of destruction days of
revolt which is written out of the
poorest pockets of the United States
Camden New Jersey per capita the poorest
and most dangerous city in America the
coalfields of southern West Virginia
Pine Ridge South Dakota Native American
reservation or the average life
expectancy is 48 for a male that's the
lowest in the Western Hemisphere outside
of Haiti the produce fields in Florida
where literally you encounter examples
or scenarios of slavery I interviewed
undocumented workers who had night were
chained inside a truck and their
families are threatened back in
Guatemala or Honduras if they you know
attempt in any way to report what's
going on this kind of abuse to the
authorities so that's been my work since
I came back to the United States and
then I would just also add because it's
important to me in that I've teach in a
prison I teach through Rutgers
University I teach college credit
courses to incur those who are
incarcerated my students were
incarcerated we graduated 27 formerly
incarcerated from Rutgers University
this year who had been released when we
conferred degrees BA degrees on 33 on
the inside and if you go to youtube and
type in Chris Hedges Rutgers graduation
you can see the graduation talk that I
gave so I think there's a complete in my
mind complete consistency to both my
politics and my commitment although of
course working for an elitist mainstream
publication like the New York Times I
think sometimes it's not understood by
people who just read the Straight resume
yeah thanks so I mean one of the reasons
I've actually interviewed you before but
you know one of the reasons I personally
have been really interested in your work
is because you've got so much practical
experience of the real world and I guess
that's pretty rare tp'ing thinkers and
intellectuals who I'm actually been on
the frontline as it were and I think
this is like one reason to talk to you
tonight is it sort of bills to me at
least that real world has suddenly
exploded in areas where it hasn't been
that's pretty like that for a long time
too
generations maybe and I have to confess
that for myself personally though I like
to feel like understand the world I am
I've had moods of feeling a little bit
lost about exactly what's going on and
and so what I'm interested in is is you
know in the light of your experience how
how do you think we should understand
the coronavirus crisis you know both in
York and she but also globally I mean
what what you're thinking about here and
I mean it's the first fatal blow against
the structures of industrial neoliberal
society these structures have been
hollowed out and weakened look at your
National Health Service by the forces of
neoliberalism by these global corporate
forces these speculators and finance
seers have seized control not only of
national economies you don't control
your own economy and any more than we do
we just saw this with a quote unquote
stimulus passage package that was passed
today that provides gigantic bails out
bailouts to the airline industries and
and we know from 2008 what they're going
to do with the money
that's why the stock market is rally
they buy back their stock they pay
themselves huge bonuses and they lay off
their workers so we've hollowed the
country out with the foundations of
capitalists democratic systems both
within the UK and the United States are
weak and tottering and the coronavirus
the pandemic that now faces us is the
first assault against a structure that's
so in feeble that it can't handle it
this is particularly true in the United
States where we're really in for it here
I'm just anecdotally I know numerous
people have severe what looks like
severe corona symptoms including my
friend Joe Sacco and yet they can't get
tested and one of my friends is a
doctor and she couldn't get tested and
so if their case is the number of cases
in the United States because although we
had adequate warning of course but we
didn't have the test kits we don't have
the protective gear New York City is
turning into a disaster zone with
makeshift morgues tents already being
set up outside of hospitals we have
projected unemployment now at 30%
economists are saying I think it was
three point three million filed for
unemployment last week and you you have
to remember that because of unlike
Britain we don't have a National Health
Service it's a for-profit health care
system so we have huge segments of the
population that are outside of the
healthcare system completely that not
just undocumented workers and the 80
million people who are either
underinsured or uninsured but now all of
these workers that had employee provided
health insurance that that's 58 percent
who are losing their jobs the estimate
is that to be treated for the
coronavirus it's $30,000 so you're going
to be slapping people who don't have
work with these gigantic medical bills
or denying them medical care at all
indeed was a teenager recently who died
of Corona was turned away from the
hospital because he didn't have
insurance and so we we haven't contained
the virus it's spreading exponentially
because of a lack of testing we don't
know where it is
so we can't contain it and we have a
structure in the United States which
guarantees that people will not receive
adequate medical care or they won't even
go in to get tested remember the 11
million undocumented workers in the
United States don't have access to
medical care and they're not about to
show up in an ER where ice the
immigration you know service can grab
them and throw them in a detention
center which is a whole other issue
because people are being warehoused
including children in these detention
centers where the virus will spread we
also have to point
three million people in our system of
mass incarceration that's 25 percent of
the world's population once the corona
virus gets in those prisons it will you
know rage because of the close
confinement and of course one of my
worries is that it's now Coronas been
identified in the Gaza Strip which was
one of the most densely populated and
spots on earth without addict not only
just adequate medical care but even
adequate supplies of clean water so and
and I really think this all goes back to
the destruction of the kinds of
institutions that certainly were put in
place in the New Deal in the United
States were put in place an old labor
and then dismantled by Tony Blair and
Margaret Margaret Thatcher later Tony
Blair and quote-unquote New Labour
dismantled in the United States by
Reagan and then our version of Tony
Blair Bill Clinton and Joe Biden let's
not forget was integral part of this and
so the system has been reconfigured to
serve the interests of these global
corporate oligarchic elites for a long
time at the expense of the rest of us
and and now because of the stress caused
by this pandemic we're paying for it I
don't see how we're going to come back
from it certainly not like before you
have the capitalist class and we've seen
it with Trump call for this ridiculous
idea that you can return to work by
Easter Sunday because they would rather
one two three four percent of the
population and of course the most
vulnerable part of the population die
rather than see the economy go into a
tailspin it's going to be I mean one
thing's going to trigger another I mean
so Americans if you have a certain
income level you may get a check for a
thousand dollars which is ridiculous
it's gonna get funneled right back into
your landlords pocket or the credit card
companies or something out but then
we're already talking hearing about rent
strikes there's
under way in st. Louis and that's
because especially low-income people
can't pay their rents and then what
happens that this is a accelerating
problem as we speak and wasn't even
addressed by the stimulus package
terrible word but the bailout for big
industry that was just passed today so
what happens then well if history is any
guide from 2008 and from today than the
huge multi-millionaire slumlords like
the Kushner's this is Trump's son-in-law
will get bailed out and people be on the
streets so the system doesn't work and
or doesn't work for us and as these
stresses multiply and and as the system
fails in any meaningful way
to rectify the suffering or address the
suffering that is gripping larger and
larger segments of the population then
the problem will only be exacerbated and
and made worse I mean you know what did
we do in the United with this bailout
package they extended unemployment
benefits for four months I mean this is
ridiculous and it phenomenally
short-sighted because it will create
social unrest and social upheaval what
direction that will take I don't know
the United States has a large segment I
mean most of them support Trump who are
in essence fascistic and their outlook
as the situation deteriorates I have no
doubt that Trump will do what he has
done in the past which is to incite
violence and exacerbate racist attacks
against people who will be blamed for
the breakdown undocumented workers I
mean now we've got Chinese Americans you
know liberals we were already seen
Trump's effort through lawsuits to
muzzle the press
I mean we're headed I think in a you
know I think I'm worried I mean
certainly in the United States
can't speak to britain night I don't
know it as well but certainly in the
United States we're headed to a very
kind of frightening corporate
totalitarianism and we have created both
legally and physically the mechanisms to
put that in essence totalitarian system
in place in our d-- industrialized urban
pockets where poor people of color live
where there is no work and the only work
you can get is in the illegal economy
which pushes you right into the prison
system the jails in prison
we have militarized police by that i
mean police who are issued
military-grade weapons
that's long-barreled weapons kevlar
vests armored personnel carriers if you
watched the riots in Ferguson you saw it
or the uprise in Ferguson you saw that
equipment and with fifty caliber machine
guns mounted on top you know aimed at
unarmed protesters in the streets that
that with the flip of a switch can be
used throughout the whole country and
we've created legal mechanisms largely
through terrorism laws which have been
used quite ruthlessly against Muslim
activists in the country since 9/11 to
strip you of habeas corpus due process
even impose secret trials where
defendants are not allowed to see or
including their lawyers the evidence
that's being used against them so it's
all there it's all ready to go Hannah
Aaron writes about this and origins of
totalitarianism where she warns and she
herself of course after spending three
weeks imprisoned by the Gestapo is
expelled from Germany and stripped of
her citizenship so she's undocumented in
French she's stateless and she writes
about the phenomena of being stateless
and she said once rights become
privileges once the state has the
ability to strip you of your protections
as a citizen then everyone can be
stripped of those rights which of course
is what Germany ultimately did so I
think you know as Mark Twain said
history doesn't repeat itself but it
rhymes there are lessons of the past
that you know we should heed and I'm
very I'm very worried I mean on a
personal level I'm worried for my
children
but I'm also worried for where the
United States potentially is headed yeah
well I I mean I feel like a lot of
people were being waiting for something
to happen right because there's so many
tensions and so many dysfunctions in the
systems though you know we have to live
live through and as you could say a
little bit about some of the underlying
structures that have led us to this
situation have been writing books since
about 2000 about these these structures
and there's a deeper story here I guess
that you've written about is why Western
societies have come to this place of of
vulnerability and you know where we are
today so you may be referring some of
your bucks maybe you can say these
underlying underlying processes well you
know I'm not a Marxist in the sense that
I don't buy into Marx's utopianism of
the proletariat state you know that's
Hegelian and I but I do think Marx's
analysis with the heavy contribution of
angles who had the data of capitalism is
correct that's why the first volume of
Marx's three volume capital and I admit
it's a slog is an important book and as
Marx understood unfettered or
unregulated capitalism these are his
words as a revolutionary force and
that's because it by nature by its
nature commodifies everything the human
world becomes a commodity human beings
become commodities the natural world
becomes a commodity that it then
exploits until exhaustion or collapse
and that's what and and let's not
divorce capitalism from imperialism and
white supremacy I mean having spent two
decades in the developing world I
understood very very well that
imperialism was the expression of white
supremacy beyond the borders of the
the Brits you know perfected that notion
of the white man's burden and the raj
and it gets as it it's it's this most
revealing example or illustration of of
the inherent racism within the system
because you impose by force you take
control of countries where people of
color live and you exploit cheap labor
that's what capitalism is doing now
corporate capitalism and you plunder the
resources I remember interviewing once
the President of the Congo
you know the friend the not the Belgian
Congo but there's to Congress but not
Zaire but the Congo and he the French
oil company was in there taking all of
the oil and even the president of the
country had no idea how much they were
taking indeed the the state French oil
company had its own private army that
French mercenaries that control the oil
fields within his country and so
capitalism by nature when it's
unfettered and unregulated and
uncontrolled will go in and exploit
natural resources and human beings until
collapse and that was the fundamental
reason that Joe Sacco and I went out and
did our book days of destruction days of
revolt we went to the places where
capitalism that capitalism destroyed
first I mean take the coal fields of
southern West Virginia I mean when we
got the coal via and I encourage
everyone who comes to the states to see
it because that's what's gonna do to the
rest of us which was the idea of the
book so it's just a toxic wasteland
billion gallon impoundment ponds filled
with heavy metals and carcinogens you
can't breathe the air every couple hours
we were in a four-wheel vehicle I'd have
to get out with paper towels because
my windows were black from just from the
soot in the air from the coal dust from
open-pit mining from these draglines
mountaintop removal of course you go
into the elementary schools and in the
nurse's office there were rows of little
inhalers because all the kids can't
breathe the water I mean even some of
these hollows you could turn on the
faucet and light the water on fire
cancer was an epidemic that you know
they owned the judges they owned the
press I'm talking about the coal
companies they owned all of the governor
they owned all of the state legislators
and and we wrote the book to say you
know there they were first but we're
next
and what's happened with Imperial
capitalist expansion is that they don't
have any place left to go they would go
into a certain area and destroy it and
then move on to somewhere else you know
one civilization would exhaust resources
collapse and move and then and then the
Spanish would do its conquest and and we
are one of the few countries that
carried out in essence imperial
expansion internally before in 1898 we
turned on Spain but what do they leave
behind now there's nowhere else to go it
spent 400 years of pillage looting
environmental destruction and the games
up so this time when but I hesitate to
use the word civilization but when
industrial power goes down the whole
planets gonna go with us and we've
reached you know I we you know I think
there's strong evidence we're beyond the
tipping point we're certainly which XR
knows in a period of mortal peril
existential peril and we're powerless to
just as were powerless to get our
government to respond in a rational way
to this pandemic we're powerless to get
them
respond in a rational way to the ecocide
that ultimately will kill all of us
because this is the nature of unfettered
and unregulated capitalism and I
actually it's you know I come out of I'm
presbyterian
actually I am ordained but I come out of
a very dark I come out of Calvin very
dark view of human nature I'm not
I don't like capitalism I see it as the
enemy but I also realized that not
everyone but but but a significant
portion of human beings are dominated by
self-interest but if you don't regulate
and control that self-interest then it
destroys your society and that's what's
happened with the difference being
instead of the old capitalist class you
know the people who ran the textile
mills in Birmingham or Manchester it's a
global capitalist class that is moved
manufacturing into you know not now not
don't use this to be you know overly
dramatic but into slave camps in China I
mean certainly the Weaver's or slaves or
appalling sweatshops where with wage
theft and terrible conditions and when
workers don't meet quotas they're not
paid and they climb on the tops of these
overcrowded dormitories and jump off and
commit suicide and and so we've kind of
rolled backwards 70% of the US economy
is based on consumption most of which of
course we don't need and that's what's
freaking at the the capitalist class
this pandemic has essentially shut that
consumption down and so yeah you're
watching seizures within the capitalist
system that are quite profound and quite
dramatic and may be hard to rollback and
with those seizures will come profound
social dislocation yeah so I mean how I
see and I think how you see is that you
know the climate crisis obviously
extinction rebellion is primarily
orientated towards is the inability
to deal with it is an outcome of some of
these things you've been talking about
and I suppose for a lot of people it
feels like the coronaviruses
precursor to the climate crisis there's
a lot of similar dynamics its inability
to assess risks its inability to protect
those vulnerable is that how you how you
would see the larger sort of climate
crisis situation yeah because I mean the
climate crisis we know will create a
very similar phenomena in that it will
destroy coastal cities we know that it
already is because of rising
temperatures increasing pandemics and
the destruction of crops through
droughts and wildfires look at Australia
and through pests that are no longer in
colder months controlled so yes I look
at this pandemic as you know I hate to
say it but the beginning of the end is
it's you know even if we get through it
and in the United States there are gonna
be a lot of people who die because of
the tremendous and aptitude on the part
of the corporate elites here I mean the
idea that we don't have even stockpiled
masks because we don't make anything
anymore except weapons that we don't
have ventilators that we don't even have
enough hospital beds we're using
military hospital ships to go to Los
Angeles and New York I mean I think this
exposes the internal rod that has been
going on for a few decades and the
inability on the part of this rapacious
corporate oligarchic elite which has
consolidated both wealth and power into
their own hands you know you know Ralph
Nader who I admire and is a friend and I
was a speechwriter and when he ran
calls these people traitors and he's
right there are absolutely traitors they
have no loyalty they'll use the
resources of the state whether it's the
Federal Reserve or the military or the
courts or the legislative bodies to
further their
own interest but they're incapable of
understanding or or fostering in any way
the common good and there's two rules
there's one rules for one rule for them
trumping his entire life has been an
example of this there's one legal system
for them and there's a completely
different system for us Matt Taibbi
wrote a book about this which is good
called the divine and that's right and I
think the great mistake on the part of
liberal elites and this would be true
for people who supported Sanders and I
was quite public about this in 2016 and
I think I've been proven right into 20
is that the Democratic Party which is
you know as Ralph says it's just one
it's a it's a duopoly it's one corporate
party
you just get to pick which flavor you
want do you want to be a nativist racist
Islamophobic homophobic you know with a
confederate flag plaster on the back of
your pickup or do you want to be
inclusive and tolerant and want to have
a woman president or a gay president or
african-american president actually
Obama was an African American who's
biracial his father was from the United
States but as Cornel West said about
Obama he was just a black mascot for
Wall Street it's an advertising gimmick
on all of the substantial issues whether
it's imperial power we just saw it with
this bailout bill whether it's free
trade whether it's the security and
surveillance state within the state
there's no difference you know that they
argue over what Freud call the
narcissism of minor difference these are
largely cultural issues some of which
are important certainly women women's
right to choose without question but
they're tangential issues to political
issues they you know cable news shows
will spend all of their time you know
having people fight over these issues
and I think but it's really way to cover
up on how and all of the major issues
there's I mean this latest trade bill
which was passed replaced NAFTA which is
just NAFTA
with another name I think there were
fifty people in the Congress that voted
against it
it was almost complete unanimity by both
parties and so Schumer and Pelosi are
figures of the corporate state they
their power comes from funneling Wall
Street money to anointed Democratic
candidates
I was with Bernie Sanders in 2016 at the
climate March with sha misawa the
socialist City Councilwoman from Seattle
and she was pressing him about running
as an independent arguing correctly that
the Democratic Party was never going to
give him the nomination and that we were
never going to build a sustainable
political movement or you know he calls
it a political revolutionary movement in
an election cycle and I think 2020 has
just proved his naivete Bernie's answer
was I don't want to end up like Nader
which means I don't want to end up a
pariah don't want the Democratic Party
to mount a campaign so I lose my Senate
seat I don't want to lose my seniority
within the Democratic caucus which he
has you know I'm gonna be a loyal
lieutenant to Schumer for four years and
they're gonna give me a chance and he
was wrong and I think X are one of the
reasons I like XRD is it gets it the
system is not going to respond to us the
only hope is to pit power against power
and that means to create centrifugal
forces of power outside of the system
yeah well this seems to me like one of
the main things that like separates you
from other commentators because I hear a
lot of commentators you know have a
fairly standard analysis which should
have reflect what you've said you know
that the system is basically broken but
it seems to me like they don't want to
cross the Rubicon to actually say that
rebellion is both necessary and
justified and I think that something
that maybe more people are gonna stop
thinking about as a result of what's
going to happen
next few months and I think like the
question for me is okay so you know
Bernie Sanders campaign isn't the
political revolution he claims it to be
then what does the political revolution
in 2020 look like you know what the main
structures and features an organization
or you know features that that point the
way because the fact of the matter is no
one really has got a lot of experience
of it in the Western world right it's
not like we've been doing this for a
long time it's been thirty years people
trying to do gradualist and reformist
sort of measures you know often with
really good intentions of course but
hasn't actually brought us anywhere as
we're finding out at the moment so what
what's your vision you know how do you
see that physical revolution everything
within our power to obstruct and destroy
the mechanisms of corporate power and
their ability to garner profit that's
why I was at Standing Rock you know in
France with the yellow vests I was with
XR in New York when we shut down the
street in front of the New York Stock
Exchange that's it that that that's our
only hope and I'm not Eve I'm not I I
don't share the culture is kind of mania
for hope I think hope is or the selling
of false hope is disempowering I think
we have the first thing we have to do is
face the very oblique nassif or us and
even accept that we may not succeed but
that we have a moral imperative
especially for those of us who have
children because they're going to
inherit what's left of this world to get
out and fight in every way possible to
make that world sustainable for them so
I don't know if I'm going to succeed I'm
63 years old but I at least want my kids
to look back and say that I tried and
that's gonna be uncomfortable I don't
like going to jail I've been to jail not
for a long period of time but I've been
to jail as you have that's kind of
more time than I care to donate to the
US government but I'll do it
and I I you know even if it we fail we
create a community we nurture life with
in what I would call a culture of death
and I guess in that sense I fall back on
somebody who comes out of a faith
tradition and I'm not in any way
trumpeting one faith over another I
spent 20 years overseas I saw how people
out of all faiths and all tradition rose
up on behalf of the oppressor to fight
for the oppressed and those are the
people who have kinship with and who I
admire whether they're Muslim or Hindu
or it makes no difference but I do think
that that the fact that I come out of a
religious tradition is not accidental
because as Daniel Berrigan the great
radical priest said I when I asked him
to define faith once he said faith is
the belief that the good draws to it the
good even if all empirical evidence says
otherwise I think that there is
empirical evidence that the good draws
to it the good it's why I like X R I'm
rooted in non-violence and but then we
have to let it go I mean there's no
surety there's no certainty certainly
that within our lifetime I mean within
my lifetime everything that I fought for
has gotten worse but that I don't think
invalidates what I've done and I think
that's where being rooted in a faith
tradition I mean certainly our two
greatest prophets in the United States
Malcolm X and Martin Luther King came
out of you know deep religious
traditions and beliefs there's a
wonderful moment you know people forget
there's one great biography of King by
Darrell
called burying the cross people forget
that King like Malcolm at the end of his
life was a very lonely figure I mean
most people have walked out the young
black activists had gone off to the
Black Power movement he was booed when
he went to watts after the riots and the
FBI after he denounced the Vietnam War
in 1967 a year to the day from when he
was assassinated withdrew his his
protection his physical protection and
both King and and Hoover and Johnson
President Johnson knew what that meant
King knew he would die in the same way
that Malcolm knew he would die and there
was a moment where King was with his
staff under tremendous pressure and he
just got up and he said I take
non-violence to be my lawfully-wedded
wife and sickness and his health and and
and I think that that at that moment you
saw the power of faith the you know that
the king himself was watching his
movement disintegrate he knew his life
was going to be terminated very soon and
and that is finally what sustained him
in the same way that that's what
sustained Malcolm X yeah I think this is
again something that separates you from
a lot of conventional sort of
commentators that to my mind seems it be
still transfixed with a sort of material
utilitarian sort of rationale for action
which is you know we can make things
better and we need to work out how to do
it and then we can't do it and if we
can't then we don't act and I mean my
reading and the tradition I come from is
very much you know my parents were
Christians as well what have you and the
tradition died few like to come from it
because there's a good way to live your
life and that's all you can do you count
you can't expect anything more this life
doesn't owe you anything you know and I
I think what's sad I guess is that we've
lost
because we've had things so good for so
many people I guess in the West anyway
you sort of lost hold of what that
actually means and was wondering whether
you know what the first time I saw your
videos I was quite shocked because I
felt like you were talking directly to
me because you're sort of you are
referring back to some traditions that
really don't get referred to and I feel
personally like we need to reconnect
with some of those historical
philosophies or ways of life or ways of
resistance and some dream may be to just
finish off you can talk a little bit
about what you think those main those
main philosophies or ways of being oh
you know that younger people today can
learn from well you're right as soon as
you know I would say both for
revolutionaries and for the religious
the practical is irrelevant
Hannah Aaron said you know don't trust
people who say this shouldn't be done or
this ought to be done only trust those
people who say I can't so I just lost my
job at truth dig where I have had a
column for 15 years every Monday because
the staff went on strike over the
attempts of the wealthy heiress who
funds the site to fire the editor Bob
Sheeran because of a series of labor
abuses including the attempt to give
employees contracts where they sign away
all their labor and civil rights under
California national law now that wasn't
practical and I mean that irony is that
she didn't pay me I had actually raised
through grant money my own salary for
the site and the site has been shut down
and all of us are unemployed but there
wasn't any question as soon as she
started it would have been you know easy
I suppose to try and have some kind of
accommodation but I couldn't stand by
and watch what she was doing to Bob
Scheer one of the legendary journalists
in the United States the former editor
of ramparts his 84 almost 84 now one of
the Titans of American journalism and at
the beginning it was just me I mean I
called him in Sorella she pushes
you're not going out alone it ended up
snowballing and the entire staff went on
strike and so you know and and some of
these editors have taken that's the only
source of income they had so they're the
economic cost for them is far greater
than for me I am in the midst of reading
a book and I have a television show and
they don't so they're far more
courageous then I was but again it's
it's that you know you can't it's not
about what's practical it's what about
what's right and I think that when you
take what you believe in so far as you
can determine it as a moral stance and
you don't pay a cost and it's probably
not that moral I mean most moral stances
if they're truly moral I mean we all can
you know talk about the evils of Jim
Crow or something in these kinds of
horrible systems of the past but one of
my problems with this church in the
United States is where are they on mass
incarceration which for me is the civil
rights issue of our time they're nowhere
to be seen so the rhetoric of the
liberal class never matches its actions
but I think for the revolutionary the
radical and ultimately the religious it
does come down to as Aaron said I mean I
can't it's what's right or wrong no
matter what the consequences are not
only and not only that but it's right or
wrong no matter what the outcome is even
if the outcome at least in the short
term appears to be detrimental to what
you say and one and I'm gonna be very
hard to picked up I mean I mean the
editor called the Nation magazine they
don't want me I mean they don't want
this kind of critique I mean I'll find
somewhere to go but I you know life
short you learn that in war and in the
end you you wanna look back and you know
not regret that you didn't stand up not
regret that you were crippled by fear
or self-interest that your life meant
something I mean that comes down to the
fundamental question of what constitutes
a life of meaning and you know as
Faulkner said every life viewed from the
inside is a failure we're all in that
sense failures but I know that you know
they you know Auden said these ironic
points of light that flash out wherever
the just exchanged their messages I mean
I I am propelled forward by these
figures like my father who stood up at
personal cost in the past I can't betray
them and I won't betray them and they
allow me to define what is a life of
meaning for me even if the rest of
society not only doesn't recognize it
but even attempts to negate it and I
think that is the power of we would say
bearing witness doing what is right that
that there is I mean beragon became a
close friend before he died the great
radical priest but burned draft records
with homemade napalm and and stood there
praying until they arrested and put him
in the federal in a federal prison for
23 months broke into nuclear sites and
poured his blood over weapons he just
wouldn't stop and when you have those
kinds of bombs those kinds of
relationships that and especially as you
age as I'm aging in many ways their
presence becomes more real than the
presence of people around you they're
constantly I mean is very close to the
theologian James Kohn who we just lost
America hands down America's greatest
theologian his book the cross in the
lynching tree is stunning where he
condemns the white church and white
theologians for never denouncing
lynching which they never did no
theologian ever mentioned it and he
talks about lynching as a modern form of
crucifixion because remember they
lynched children and he said you know
there it was the crucifixion right in
front of them and the church couldn't
see it and he talks about that
commitment to the crucified
of the earth and that is our that's our
role that we are to stand with a
crucified of the earth earth and that
when you truly stand with the oppressed
ultimately you will be treated like the
oppressed and of course that I is the
greatest validation of a life yeah
thanks
yeah I'm glad we touched him what it
really means to for each of us as
individuals and I think that's really
what it comes down to the end of the day
I mean I'm sure lots of people watching
this call and it's easy to it's easy to
have the right analysis it's not so easy
to look into your own self and decide
what it means to be who you are right
that's the difficult bit I mean we all
struggle with everyday of course but
yeah Ruth once thank you for for your
comments about these things and I think
Robins going to organize a few questions
from people is that right Robin I think
Karen is got about 20 minutes or so yeah
people have got questions feel free to
check them in in the QA Cara scan is
gonna help with asking them to you guys
I think we'll start with a question from
Marco he says do you think that at this
time in place it's more important to
want to win or to want to be right most
revolutionaries throughout history don't
win most of them get extinguished that's
just a historical fact and the
theologian Reinhold Niebuhr says that
you know what revolutionaries are people
who revolt rise up against the system
are endowed with is sublime madness and
by that he means that the traditional
mechanisms of liberal reform don't work
there too tp'ed they're too intellectual
and Niebuhr adds that the problem with
liberals is that they don't ultimately
understand evil and so if you
stand up and your criteria is to win
then you're going to be easily
demoralized and defeated but if you
stand up because it's right that of
course doesn't mean you won't win but it
means that you're in it for the long
term that you're not wedded to the
emotional highs and lows that
characterize a consumer society so next
we have one from Jason he says he's a
podcaster in Guatemala
he was asking how can independent media
in Latin America or anywhere be most
effective during this crisis well I I
would say that most of the examples of
effective nonviolent civil disobedience
come from the global South not from the
industrialized north so I would say that
he probably has a lot more to teach me
than I have to teach him through this
crisis how can we best direct attention
to rebuild economies around something
like donut economics which factors in
the earth's resources so the nature of
capitalism is that it only defines
itself by what its against communism
socialism because its own nature is so
venal and self-centered and when the
Europeans and Ural Americans carried out
their campaign of genocide against
Native Americans it wasn't only to steal
a land and the buffalo herds and the
gold in the Black Hills it was to
destroy a competing communal ethic which
was completely opposed to the ethic of
capitalism in an indigenous culture
people who hoarded things for them
selves were despised either everyone ate
or no one ate and I think that ethic was
as threatening to capitalism as perhaps
most threatening to capitalism so we
have to as indigenous communities around
the world have reminded us recover that
communal ethic where everyone eats or no
one eats where those who hoard material
possessions and power for themselves and
their own are thrown out and despised I
mean the great indigenous leaders like
Sitting Bull I think offer examples for
where we have to go and Sitting Bull you
know scathing contempt for Europeans and
euro Americans who who thought they
could buy an own land
I think directs us or helps us
rediscover a kind of ethic that might
make it possible for pockets of human
society to sustain themselves at least
for a while a question for watcher and
Chris it seems that we're finally
getting a taste of what government and
media telling the truth is like does
this change the way that exile should
look at this demand because it seems
like the government is still inadequate
even when the truth is told well I'll
let Roger start with that are you
talking about which government I mean as
awful as Boris Johnson is and he's
certainly awful we win the prize for you
know utter insanity yeah well there are
degrees of insanity as we're discovering
in this crisis on the brazilian guy gets
the top prize at the moment but
yeah I mean the way I iced it is that in
terms of the broader climate crisis is
there's still a fundamental denial of
responsibility by governments to look at
physical reality and for me like the
coronaviruses a really clear example of
where nature decides is going to do
something and because our culture and
our political class doesn't recognize
that nature as any power or any say then
it ignores it until is too late and for
me like there's a direct analogy here of
not telling the truth about the broader
geophysical situation which is you know
really straightforward is you'll know
that if you caught carbon into the
atmosphere then you're going to destroy
the weather systems and have mass
starvation and that's done that the
extremity of that risk is simply not
existing I mean I think is a question I
don't know you think Chris but I think
this crisis may go some way to actually
reminding ordinary people anyway that
there is enough a world out there you
know and it needs to be considered I
don't know what I think we're learning a
lesson in the danger of human hubris you
go back and I studied classics and and
read you know all of the great classical
playwrights Sophocles that was a
persistent common theme that human
hubris would destroy you
because there were forces natural forces
beyond your control that if you didn't
honor and if you thought you could
dominate would crush you and that's
precisely what's happening you know
consumer culture is kind of an anaphora
in the sense that it revolves around the
cult of the self the sense
of total empowerment extended of course
through the access to machines even
immortality the obsession of the culture
with youth you know all of this has fed
very dark proclivities that are within
all of us and those who provide a dose
of wisdom whether artists or writers or
have been so pushed to the margins
because their voices don't fit with this
mantra of positive thinking positive
thoughts you know as if somehow positive
thoughts you know or what we desire and
what we want and you know how we view
ourselves you know it's never affected
by reality so you know I hope you're
right Roger the only thing I would say
from my many years of watching and
reporting from disintegrating societies
is that often times people have very
short memories if they can get back into
the particular however unhealthy milieu
that they were in
thank you for that one so I'm gonna just
Marge a couple here so we've got one
asking how you Chris feel about filling
up jails with rage blockers and
therefore do you think civil
disobedience helps in this crisis or any
crisis and if not commercial Protestant
solutions so the point is to get so many
roadblocks that there's no room in the
jails I was after Occupy Wall Street
they shut down Zuccotti we had a series
of demonstrations where we took over
streets without city permits one of them
had 10,000 people but the could the
police do with 10,000 people what were
they gonna do you know arrest a thousand
I mean they couldn't even fit a thousand
in the city jails so the idea is to get
the numbers or get waves of numbers that
in essence overload the system so it
doesn't function once you get a million
I mean I covered the revolutions in
Eastern Europe we had 500,000 people and
Alexander Platz in East Germany in East
Berlin or the same number in Prague
during the Velvet Revolution where the
police gonna do they joined them because
what happened as well saying in wages
rebellion you paraphrase Sparta I do not
fight fascist because I will win I fight
fascist because they are fascists and
they've looked at fascism through a
religious sense in another book beyond
just that really just scope however how
widespread is fascism in the world and
are we past the tipping point of what
you and Waylon foresaw is inverted
totalitarianism for full on global
fascism so yeah I love that quote I use
it so much I've had to stop using it
because I could see like I'd get in
front of an audience they kind of mouth
it along with me although I do think
it's great and I did steal it from
Sartre
who was talking to a friend of his he
was trying to talk him out
of going to back to fight in the Spanish
Civil War that last year when it was
clear that the fascist forces were gonna
win and is the friend his friend said I
don't fight fascists in French and we
don't fight fascist cuz their fascist I
fight I don't think fascist because I'm
gonna win I fight fascist cuz they are
fascists so I mean that gets to the
point we spoke about earlier about just
standing up and and fighting evil
because it's evil
I in my book American fascist the
Christian Right in the war in America at
the end of the book I was very very I
didn't use the word fascist lightly in
the title and I went to the two great
scholars of fascism that would be Fritz
turn himself who fled Nazi Germany as a
teenager and he wrote the politics of
cultural despair and then I went to that
Robert Paxton who wrote anatomy of
fascism teaches at Columbia and I and I
had spent two years with a Christian
right which i think is a heretic all
fascist force and of course that's why
they're now filling the ideological void
of Trump
Pompeyo Betsy DeVos bar Carson all these
people come out of the Christian heart
Christian right and they couldn't I mean
I I so I didn't use the word lightly but
I remember Stern saying that you know in
Germany there was a yearning for fascism
before the word fascism was invented I
think you certainly see that in the
United States you see it in Britain you
know you know Nigel Faraj these kinds of
figures even Boris Johnson to an extent
they're flirting and empowering
fascistic forces were more advanced in
the United States because the Christian
Right has had years of building
infrastructure media platforms Liberty
University Patrick Henry University they
are stacking the federal courts courtesy
of the Trump administration Betsy DeVos
is busy funneling federal dollars into
quote-unquote Christian schools as a way
these are his were her words to advance
the kingdom her brother Eric Prince the
founder of Blackwater
there was just a story in The New York
Times the other day about how he has
been used to infiltrate groups including
teachers unions means kind of the
equivalent of the brown shirts so I
britain's british society is different
and i once heard eduardo galeano who i
admire immensely at a talk start talking
about american society he just didn't
quite get it because he wasn't here so
I'm not gonna try and do an assessment
of your society you can all do it better
than I can but certainly within American
society those forces are real on the
last point inverted totalitarianism this
is a very most important political
philosopher Sheldon Wolin wrote a book
called democracy incorporated he creates
this term inverted totalitarianism by
which he means it's not classical
totalitarianism it doesn't find its
expression through a demagogue or a
charismatic leader but through the
anonymity of the corporate state so like
the late Roman Empire you have the
facade of the American system electoral
politics the Constitution which is been
rendered by judicial Fiat null and void
we don't have the right to privacy or
anything else and so you have the facade
but internally corporations control all
the levers of power that's what he means
by inverted totalitarianism and and he
says that that is different from
classical forms of totalitarianism
because it is about the primacy of
profit so both under Stalinism or under
Nazism profit was not the primary
incentive I mean at the end of the war
they were dedicating tremendous amounts
of railroad stock even though they
needed it to transfer weapons to fight
the the Soviet forces that were overrun
in Eastern Europe they filled it with
you know Jewish families to send them
off to Auschwitz or Sobibor somewhere in
inverted totalitarianism Proffitt always
takes precedent over human life which
gets me right back to the health care
system in the United States where we are
now
in the middle of a pandemic watching the
primacy of profit over human life
yeah I was just gonna add you know this
this comment you have about fashions and
it's not just a piece of rhetoric as it
were or a you know an assertion when I
was doing my research and civil
disobedience at King's College I was
talking to another researcher researched
the working class miners who went to
fight against fascism in a Spanish Civil
War and you know he's the main resort
his research was again that people
didn't go to Spain in order to beat
fascism they went to Spain because it
had to be done that's that was the
phrase it had something had to be done
and they had to do something about it
and I think you know for me this is the
central theme of what actually we have
to do which is to do things because they
have to be done you know if you go down
to learn and sit in the road obviously
you want to get negotiations with
government at that changing climate
change my view but the fundamental
reason why you're sitting in the road is
because it has to be done as simple as
that you know and paradoxically you know
my research and experience shows that
the more people who don't care about
whether they win or not the more likely
you are to win because you're not so
vulnerable to the outcome I mean it's
it's one of those weird head-fuck things
you know because you just go round in
circles but it's certainly true and
industry my experience to do you know
various sorts of social minute work for
several decades is the people that are
sustainable are doing it because it's
something I have to do because it's the
right thing to do and that's what
sustains you over the long term much as
you said Chris so you know it's a major
lesson I guess I would also add that it
gives you power because people know you
can't be bought off people know that
you're not going to be dissuaded through
an argument about why this doesn't make
sense and you know maybe you should go
talk to the Democratic leadership it
gives you a kind of power because they
know that
your unwavering so I would agree totally
it's kind of paradoxical that it your
power comes from the point where you
don't really care whether it's the seeds
or not that's where your power comes
from yeah yeah it's a good quote I found
recently for a man Larry Kramer who's
one of the key activists in the at tops
campaigns around aids and I think I've
got this right said something along the
lines of we didn't give a flying
what people thought of us and that's
what gave was our strength and that's a
really interesting point of view
you didn't really be around the bush
that guy but yeah that's exactly right I
remember I was very critical of the
black bloc and antiva during occupy and
I spent a lot of time in Zuccotti and
some of the occupy activists who weren't
black bloc said well you know it's hurt
the movement and you know everybody
admired you and now they don't and I
said the moment I need your adulation
I'm finished it doesn't matter what you
think of me it doesn't make any
difference my job at least insofar as I
can do it is to speak the truth
even if it's an unpopular truth it's not
- it's not running for anything I'm not
a politician I'm not trying to be
popular I don't I don't care whether I'm
popular or not and I think that that
that quote from Kramer is exactly right
as soon as you give a about what
people think
actually Dwight MacDonald a great social
theorist Rota essay called mask all
midcult which is very good and it's
about the danger of intellectuals
appealing to mass culture you know in
thinking that their influence is
determined by their the numbers of
people are able to reach you know going
on MSNBC or something which didn't exist
when you wrote it but but that's right
that that's not actually their power and
so yeah that's that's you know we or
those of us who you know certainly as a
writer who attempt to explain reality as
soon as we get caught up in in what the
reacts
potential reaction might be or what the
reaction is then you know we lose
whatever power we have I think I think
that's a really good point for everyone
with an X all you need is you have to so
I guess just another question for me
even for its Roger and I guess Chris
from your American perspective what do
we need to be doing in the UK to keep
post created subsidies and bailouts from
going to ecocidal industries and Chris
if you could interpret that in any way
that we awesome well I guess I'll begin
I mean we just passed this bill today
which does precisely that I think that
you know we're going going to have to
build organizations of resistance things
like rent strikes didn't have to rent
strike anyway because there have any
money to pay the rent
if we hit projected unemployment levels
of 30% that this you know the oh the the
the system responded the way it did
because there's it doesn't have any
pressure from us we don't count you know
it it costs staggering a billion dollars
to run for president you know the people
who pay for it are not paying for it
because they love democracy the elected
officials get to Washington and the
lobbyists write the legislation it's
kind of a system of legalized bribery we
just don't have any influence because we
don't have that kind of money we don't
have that kind of clout so what we do
have is numbers and through those
numbers we do have the ability to in
organized and concerted fashion cripple
the profits and the economy of the
ruling elites and that that's that's
that's our only hope yeah well
from my perspective looking mainly uh
what's gonna happen when we come out of
this and I think a lot of people are and
I think for me personally extinction
rebellion needs to be extremely clear in
telling the truth about there's no going
back to what we had before you know what
that leads to and we knew what is going
to lead to in the future we allow the
climate change situation to continue so
I mean again looking at what we've just
been talking about we need to engage in
muscle disease because that's what needs
to be done it's as simple as that and
where do we succeed or not who knows but
there's good reason to believe there's
going to be a lot of people open to to
the ordinance because they all live
through an example of what it means to
ignore ignore nature so we'll see of
course so sure we have one more question
before we finish is that okay yes I
guess what's around at what you were
saying someone has asked given that we
know the state is somebody not going to
respond in any meaningful way to the
climate and ecological emergency should
we be straight back onto the street
disrupting dunbine it violently as soon
as the crown of iris restrictions are
lifted of course that's the only
mechanism we have and in some ways the
corona virus is a gift to the security
and surveillance state because it's
dangerous and people shouldn't do it
right now to form crowds where people
are cannot practice social distancing so
unfortunately the nature of the pandemic
and the imperative that that people
isolate as much as possible not only for
ourselves but more importantly for
vulnerable communities allows the the
forces that we are opposed against to
consolidate power without mass
resistance however there are mechanisms
we can use and I go back to that rent
strike that don't require people to get
out in the street and those mechanisms
have to be
used and they have to be used soon okay
shall we leave it at course is that okay
yeah thanks for doing it Roger yeah well
I just want to thank everyone for coming
to this interview and this session and
obviously to Chris for taking the time
to talk to us all that's great thank you
so much
I mean we're hoping we not to do a few
more of these yeah with with other
people do and say anything yeah sure so
I'm just gonna
she's gonna show a little bit about what
we're doing upcoming so this is part of
a new series that we're working on
looking at yeah this idea of being alone
together right we're all in our step
isolation right now but we've got a lot
of content coming out of exile TV at the
moment
we want to support people this is a real
time I think for emotional connection
and we go a full program coming up over
the next week with different events and
talks like this coming up also chances
to connect reach other people's
assemblies online a chance to hear what
everyone thinks about this Cobin 19
crisis that were in a chance to talk
about act on it as well as you know fun
activities like disk obedience you want
to have a dance break online get
involved so tomorrow we've got economics
on the crisis coronavirus climate change
and what needs to change that we were
poor Mason and commentator for economics
editor for channel 4 and BBC Newsnight
and also with Molly Scott Cato so we
were boost this program and help it grow
so if you can people who are watching
today can you please support extinction
rebellion to fundraise in a way that we
can really continues this fight for the
life on Earth as it says carbon 19 has
changed many things but the rebellion
must not stop so if you're watching here
tonight please do go on and click on
giving a monthly donation by direct
debit and support us through the
rebellion to help make this happen we'd
really appreciate anything you can give
towards this work and thank you so much
for your time and efforts involved right
well thank you very much and keep safe
everyone okay all right thanks everyone
right bye bye everyone
you